h1. Rich-CMS

A Rails gem for a pluggable CMS frontend

h2. Introduction

Rich-CMS is a module of E9s ("http://github.com/archan937/e9s":http://github.com/archan937/e9s) which provides a frontend for your CMS content.
Please check out an online demo of Rich-CMS at the "Rich-CMS":http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/rich_cms or "E9s":http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/e9s page at "http://codehero.es":http://codehero.es.

h2. Installation

h3. Using Rich-CMS in Rails 3

Add Rich-CMS in @Gemfile@ as a gem dependency:

<pre>
  gem "rich_cms"
</pre>

Run the following in your console to install with Bundler:

<pre>
  bundle install
</pre>

h3. Using Rich-CMS in Rails 2

Add Rich-CMS in @environment.rb@ as a gem dependency:

<pre>
  config.gem "rich_cms"
</pre>

Run the following in your console:

<pre>
  sudo rake gems:install
</pre>

h2. Fancy contributing to Rich-CMS yourself?

1. Create your own Rich-CMS fork "https://github.com/archan937/rich_cms/fork":https://github.com/archan937/rich_cms/fork
2. Clone your Rich-CMS fork repository

<pre>
  git clone git@github.com:<your_username>/rich_cms.git && cd rich_cms
</pre>

3. Setup your environment in order to use the "GemSuit":https://github.com/archan937/gem_suit tests provided within Rich-CMS

<pre>
  gem install gem_suit && suit fit -v
</pre>

4. Run tests (e.g. the GemSuit integration tests) as follows (make sure you have "Firefox":http://www.getfirefox.com installed)

<pre>
  suit -v
</pre>

*Note*: Running the GemSuit integration tests take in a couple of minutes as it will test *10 different environments*:

Every GemSuit integration test starts with a blank Rails application, runs the required Rails generators and tests the front-end within Firefox with Capybara

* Rails *2* - *Authlogic* authenticated with *Moneta in-memory* storage
* Rails *2* - *Devise* authenticated with *Moneta in-memory* storage
* Rails *2* - *non-authenticated* with *Moneta in-memory* storage
* Rails *2* - *non-authenticated* with *Moneta ActiveRecord* storage
* Rails *2* - *non-authenticated* with *Rich-i18n forgery (combined keys)*
* Rails *3* - *Authlogic* authenticated with *Moneta in-memory* storage
* Rails *3* - *Devise* authenticated with *Moneta in-memory* storage
* Rails *3* - *non-authenticated* with *Moneta in-memory* storage
* Rails *3* - *non-authenticated* with *Moneta ActiveRecord* storage
* Rails *3* - *non-authenticated* with *Rich-i18n forgery (combined keys)*

To run unit tests in both Rails 2 and 3

<pre>
  suit test unit -v
</pre>

*Note*: *All tests are running successfully using "RVM":https://rvm.beginrescueend.com in combination with @ruby-1.8.7-p334@, @ree-1.8.7-2011.03@ and @ruby-1.9.2-p180@.*

5. You can list all the command line commands with the following

<pre>
  suit help
</pre>

6. Start either of the dummy Rails applications for development purposes

<pre>
  suit s
</pre>

*Note*: This runs the Rails 3 dummy app

<pre>
  suit s -r2
</pre>

7. Open the Rails application in your browser with "http://localhost:3000/cms":http://localhost:3000/cms and log in with <code>paul.engel@holder.nl</code> and @testrichcms@.

8. *Get on programming* and send your pull request! ;)

*Note*: For more information about GemSuit, please visit "its Github page":https://github.com/archan937/gem_suit.

h2. Use the provided Rails generators

Rich-CMS requires one entity:

* A model used for CMS content storage (which is powered with "Moneta":https://github.com/wycats/moneta)

For (optional) authentication, Rich-CMS requires one of the following:

* A @Devise@ authenticated admin model
* An @Authlogic@ authenticated admin model

Fortunately, Rich-CMS is provided with two Rails generators with which you can generate those entities.

h3. CMS admin

h4. In Rails 3

Run the following in your console:

<pre>
  rails g rich:cms_admin -m
</pre>

*Note*: At default, it will create a ("Devise":http://github.com/plataformatec/devise powered) @User@ model, the @CreateUsers@ migration and it will configure your routes.

You can alter the class name as follows:

<pre>
  rails g rich:cms_admin CodeHeroes::User -m
</pre>

*Note*: Both generators have the @-m@ or @--migrate@ option which runs @rake db:migrate@ after creating the files.

*Using Authlogic*

You can use "Authlogic":http://github.com/binarylogic/authlogic by specifying the @-a@ or @--authlogic@ option:

<pre>
  rails g rich:cms_admin CodeHeroes::User -a -m
</pre>

*Note*: As mentioned earlier, Devise is the default authentication logic. Having that said, you can explicitly specify Devise with the @-d@ or @--devise@ option.

h4. In Rails 2

Run the following in your console:

<pre>
  script/generate rich_cms_admin -m
</pre>

*Attention*: The @Devise@ Rails generator code is (practically) a copy of the "Devise 1.0.9 generator code":https://github.com/plataformatec/devise/tree/v1.0.9/generators/devise. For there are problems calling the original Devise generators in Rails 2. See also this "Stackoverflow issue":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3366508/couldnt-find-devise-install-generator-rails-2-3-8-devise-1-0-8.

h3. CMS content

h4. In Rails 3

Run the following in your console:

<pre>
  rails g rich:cms_content -m
</pre>

*Note*: At default, it will create the @CmsContent@ model and @CreateCmsContents@ migration. You can alter the class name with the following:

<pre>
  rails g rich:cms_content CmsItem -m
</pre>

h4. In Rails 2

Run the following in your console:

<pre>
  script/generate rich_cms_content -m
</pre>

In case you have used the Rails generators, you can skip the *Create required entities manually* and go straight to *Render Rich-CMS in your views*.

h2. Create required entities manually

h3. Specify the authentication mechanism

Rich-CMS can be used without an authentication mechanism (which is the default by the way), you just have to open "/cms" in your browser and you are ready to go. But it is common to have authentication and Rich-CMS thus supports "Devise":http://github.com/plataformatec/devise and "Authlogic":http://github.com/binarylogic/authlogic.

Provide the authentication logic as a symbol (e.g. @:devise@) and the authenticated class like this:

<pre>
  Rich::Cms::Auth.setup do |config|
    config.logic = :devise
    config.klass = "User"
  end
</pre>

The following specifications are optional as Rich-Cms uses defaults:

* @:inputs@ - *default*: @[:email, :password]@
  The attributes used for the login panel of Rich-CMS
* @:identifier@ - *default*: based on @inputs@
  The method used for displaying the identity of the current Rich-CMS admin (this is the first entry of @inputs@, so usually @:email@)
* @:current_admin_method@ - *default*: based on @klass@
  The controller method used to retrieve the current Rich-CMS admin (e.g. @current_user@ when configured @User@ as authenticated class)

h3. Create your CMS content class

The storage mechanism of Rich-CMS content is powered with "Moneta":https://github.com/wycats/moneta. Doing this gives you the freedom to choose the storage engine you want to use (e.g. Mongo, Redis, Tyrant, Memcache, DataMapper, ActiveRecord and many others).

Go to @app/models@ and create a file like the following (e.g. called @Content@):

<pre>
  class Content
    include Rich::Cms::Content
    storage :memory
  end
</pre>

In short: include the @Rich::Cms::Content@ module and specify which storage engine you want to use. And that was it actually!

Depending on your choice of storage engine, you will need to add some extra specs. See the "Moneta repo":https://github.com/wycats/moneta/tree/master/lib/moneta/adapters for more documentation.

There are also additional class methods which you can call of course:

h4. Identifiers

As already mentioned, Rich-CMS uses Moneta for an unified key / value store interface. But you can still let the key (identifier) consist out of multiple segments. Rich-CMS will concatenate the segments with a default delimiter @;@ in the specified order within the class definition.

<pre>
  class Content
    include Rich::Cms::Content
    storage :memory
    identifiers :locale, :key # <= Rich-CMS will concatenate the identifier in this order
  end
</pre>

As an example, @:locale => :nl, :key => "application.index.header"@ will result in @"nl:application.index.header"@. You can change the delimiter by overriding the @delimiter@ method:

<pre>
  ...
    identifiers :locale, :key

    def delimiter
      ";" # <= {:locale => :nl, :key => "application.index.header"} will result in "nl;application.index.header"
    end
  end
</pre>

*Note*: You might want to check out "rich/i18n_forgery.rb":https://github.com/archan937/rich_cms/blob/edge/suit/shared/test/suit_application/rich/i18n_forgery.rb for further documentation (especially the protected method @identity_hash_for@).

h4. Configure

When it comes to rendering Rich-CMS content in the front-end, there are three points of attention regarding the Rich-CMS content:

* the CSS class of the Rich-CMS content class in question
* the Javascript function called before showing the edit form of a content item
* the Javascript function called after updating a content item

Rich-CMS uses the CSS class to match the corresponding Rich-CMS content class in the front-end. At default, the CSS class is based on the underscored content class name prefixed with @"rcms_"@.

So @Content@ will result in "@.rcms_content@" and @Translation@ in @".rcms_translation"@. When the class name starts with @Cms@, it will be ignored. For instance, @CmsContent@ will result in @".rcms_content"@.

At default, the @before_edit@ hook is not assigned and the @after_update@ hook is assign to the Javascript function @Rich.Cms.Editor.afterUpdate@.

h4. A few examples

A simple Rich-CMS class:

<pre>
  class Content
    include Rich:Cms::Content
    storage :memory
    css_class "custom_css_class"
  end
</pre>

A slight more advanced example of a Rich-CMS class:

<pre>
  class Translation
    include Rich::Cms::Content
    storage     :active_record
    identifiers :locale, :key

    configure do |config| # for a custom CSS class: configure "translation" do |config|
      config.before_edit  "Rich.I18n.beforeEdit"
      config.after_update "Rich.I18n.afterUpdate"
    end
  end
</pre>

*Note*: Please notice that @Translation@ uses @ActiveRecord@ as storage engine

h2. Render Rich-CMS in your views

h3. Alter your layout

Add the following line at the beginning of the @<body>@ tag:

<pre>
  <body>
    <%= rich_cms %>
    ...
  </body>
</pre>

h3. Use the Rich-CMS helper method

Rich-CMS requires a rendered DOM element provided with meta data of the content entry. Fortunately, you can call a helper method to render Rich-CMS content tags. It accepts the following arguments:

* @css_class@ - The CSS class of the corresponding Rich-CMS content class
* @identifier@ - The identifier of the Rich-CMS content entry (use a hash when dealing with a combined identifier)
* @options@ - Options used to customize the rendered content tag

Please take notice: *The CSS class is only obligated when having more than one Rich-CMS content class defined!*

<pre>
  >> key = "hello_world"
  => "hello_world"
  >> ActionView::Base.new.rich_cms_tag(key)
  => "<div class='rcms_content' data-store_key='hello_world' data-store_value='Hello world!'>Hello world!</div>"
</pre>

*Note*: There is only *one* Rich-CMS content defined called @Content@

When using a combined key for content identification, just call it as follows:

<pre>
  >> ActionView::Base.new.rich_cms_tag({:key => key, :locale => I18n.locale})
  => "<div class='rcms_content' data-store_key='nl:hello_world' data-store_value='Hallo wereld!'>Hallo wereld!</div>"
</pre>

*Note*: In this case, the (*only*) Rich-CMS content class was defined with @identifiers :locale, :key@

When having multiple Rich-CMS content classes defined, pass the corresponding CSS class:

<pre>
  >> ActionView::Base.new.rich_cms_tag(".rcms_translation", {:key => key, :locale => I18n.locale})
  => "<div class='rcms_translation' data-store_key='nl:hello_world' data-store_value='Hallo wereld!'>Hallo wereld!</div>"
</pre>

The (optional) options hash can contain the following keys:

* @:as@ - *default*: auto-determined @:string@ or @:text@
  Specify the input type shown in the edit form (@:string@ for an input text, @:text@ for a textarea and @:html@ for a WYSIWYG HTML editor).
* @:tag@ - *default*: auto-determined @:div@ or @:span@
  The HTML tag used for content items. You can also specify @:none@ as value: in that case, no HTML tag will be wrapped around the content when no admin is logged in (essential in case the extra @span@ will bork the layout).
* @:html@ - *default*: @{}@
  HTML attributes added to the content tag (e.g. @:id@, @:class@)
* @:locals@ - *default*: @nil@
  When assigned a Hash, Rich-CMS assumes the content concerns a "Mustache":https://github.com/defunkt/mustache template and will render it with the passed @locals@.
* @:collection@ - *default*: @nil@
  When assigned an array, Rich-CMS assumes the content concerns a "Mustache":https://github.com/defunkt/mustache template and will render it with the (optional) passed @locals@ and the @attr_cmsable@ attributes.

*Note*: The WYSIWYG editor used is the "jQuery":http://jquery.com/ based "CLEditor":http://premiumsoftware.net/cleditor

h4. A few examples

<pre>
  ...
  <%= rich_cms_tag ".rcms_content", "about_us_page", :as => :html %>
  <%= rich_cms_tag ".rcms_content", {:key => "welcome_text", :locale => I18n.locale}, :tag => :p %>
  <%= rich_cms_tag "application.index.welcome_text", :tag => :p, :html => {:class => "welcome", :style => "display: none"} %>
  ...
</pre>

*Note*: The last statement passes when only *one* Rich-CMS content class is defined

h4. A locals example

The Rich-CMS content used:

<pre>
  header = Content.new :key => "welcome_header"
  header.value = "Hi, {{name}}!"
  header.save
</pre>

The ERB template:

<pre>
  ...
  <%= rich_cms_tag "welcome_header", :tag => :h1, :locals => {:name => "Vicky"} %>
  ...
</pre>

The compiled HTML:

<pre>
  <h1>
    Hi, Vicky!
  </h1>
</pre>

h4. A collection example

The Rich-CMS content and collection used:

<pre>
  class AttrCmsableContent # probably < ActiveRecord::Base
    attr_accessor :name    # an attribute provided by ActiveRecord::Base
    attr_cmsable  :name
  end

  @collection = %w(Vicky Johnny Paul).collect{|name| AttrCmsableContent.new.tap{|c| c.name = name}}

  header = Content.new :key => "welcome_header"
  header.value = "Hi, {{name}}!"
  header.save
</pre>

The ERB template:

<pre>
  ...
  <ul>
    <%= rich_cms_tag "welcome_header", :tag => :li, :collection => @collection %>
  <ul>
  ...
</pre>

The compiled HTML:

<pre>
  <ul>
    <li>Hi, Vicky!</li>
    <li>Hi, Johnny!</li>
    <li>Hi, Paul!</li>
  </ul>
</pre>

h3. Rich-CMS in your browser

Open "http://localhost:3000/cms":http://localhost:3000/cms, log in and start managing CMS content.

h2. Customizing the after update implementation

The @update@ action response of @Rich::CmsController@ consists of "JSON":http://www.json.org data regarding the updated content item. The response will be passed to the @after_update@ Javascript function which contains a simple JSON hash. Its default is as follows:

<pre>
  {"__css_class__": "rcms_content", "__identifier__": {"store_key": "hello_world"}, "store_value": "Hello world!"}
</pre>

*Note*: @__css_class__@, @__identifier__@ and @store_value@ are *always* provided in the JSON data.

When specifying a custom after update Javascript function, you probably want to acquire more information than provided in the default JSON data. You can customize this by defining the @to_rich_cms_response@ method in the CMS content model class and the hash will be merged with the default response hash:

<pre>
  class Translation
    include Rich::Cms::Content
    storage     :memory
    identifiers :locale, :key

    configure "translation" do |config|
      config.before_edit  "Rich.I18n.beforeEdit"
      config.after_update "Rich.I18n.afterUpdate"
    end

    def to_tag(options = {})
      super options.merge(:data => {:derivative_key => derivative_key})
    end

    def to_rich_cms_response(params)
      {:translations => Hash[*params[:derivative_keys].split(";").uniq.collect{|x| [x, x.t]}.flatten]}
    end
  end
</pre>

The JSON data returned will look like:

<pre>
  {"__css_class__": "translation", "__identifier__": {"store_key": "nl:word.user"}, "store_value": "gebruiker", "translations": {"users": "gebruikers"}}
</pre>

h2. Contact me

For support, remarks and requests please mail me at "paul.engel@holder.nl":mailto:paul.engel@holder.nl.

h2. Credit

This Rails gem depends on:

jQuery<br>
"http://jquery.com":http://jquery.com

GemSuit<br>
"https://github.com/archan937/gem_suit":https://github.com/archan937/gem_suit

Devise (optional)<br>
"http://github.com/plataformatec/devise":http://github.com/plataformatec/devise

AuthLogic (optional)<br>
"http://github.com/binarylogic/authlogic":http://github.com/binarylogic/authlogic

Moneta<br>
"https://github.com/wycats/moneta":https://github.com/wycats/moneta

SASS<br>
"http://sass-lang.com":http://sass-lang.com

Jzip<br>
"http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/jzip":http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/jzip <br>
"http://github.com/archan937/jzip":http://github.com/archan937/jzip

RaccoonTip<br>
"http://codehero.es/jquery_libraries/raccoon_tip":http://codehero.es/jquery_libraries/raccoon_tip <br>
"http://github.com/archan937/raccoon_tip":http://github.com/archan937/raccoon_tip

SeatHolder<br>
"http://codehero.es/jquery_libraries/seat_holder":http://codehero.es/jquery_libraries/seat_holder <br>
"http://github.com/archan937/seat_holder":http://github.com/archan937/seat_holder

CLEditor<br>
"http://premiumsoftware.net/cleditor/index.html":http://premiumsoftware.net/cleditor/index.html

h2. Contributors

* Mark Mulder - "@bitterzoet":http://twitter.com/bitterzoet - "http://ikbenbitterzoet.com":http://ikbenbitterzoet.com
* Stephan Kaag - "@stephankaag":http://twitter.com/stephankaag - "http://hollandonrails.nl":http://hollandonrails.nl
* Jeroen Bulters - "@bulters":http://twitter.com/bulters - "http://bulte.rs":http://bulte.rs
* Chris Obdam - "@chrisobdam":http://twitter.com/chrisobdam - "http://holder.nl":http://holder.nl
* Johan Vermeulen - "@johpie":http://twitter.com/johpie - "http://www.prutz-lan.nl":http://www.prutz-lan.nl
* Peter Beers - "http://holder.nl":http://holder.nl

h2. ToDo's

* Add cache feature which uses the standard Rails cache
* Provide web pages management (e.g. Rich-Pages)
* Provide object management (e.g. articles and products)
* Provide file uploads (e.g. images)
* Check out compatibility with Devise 1.2 and 1.3
* Provide better conventions for content rendering
* Provide tools to use Textile, MarkDown

h2. Enrichments

The all-in-one gem at - "http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/e9s":http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/e9s - "http://github.com/archan937/e9s":http://github.com/archan937/e9s

h3. E9s modules

* Rich-Support <br> "http://codehero.es":http://codehero.es <br> "http://github.com/archan937/rich_support":http://github.com/archan937/rich_support
* Rich-CMS <br> "http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/rich_cms":http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/rich_cms <br> "http://github.com/archan937/rich_cms":http://github.com/archan937/rich_cms
* Rich-i18n <br> "http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/rich_i18n":http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/rich_i18n <br> "http://github.com/archan937/rich_i18n":http://github.com/archan937/rich_i18n
* Rich-pluralization <br> "http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/rich_pluralization":http://codehero.es/rails_gems_plugins/rich_pluralization <br> "http://github.com/archan937/rich_pluralization":http://github.com/archan937/rich_pluralization

h2. License

Copyright (c) 2011 Paul Engel, released under the MIT license

"http://holder.nl":http://holder.nl - "http://codehero.es":http://codehero.es - "http://gettopup.com":http://gettopup.com - "http://twitter.com/archan937":http://twitter.com/archan937 - "paul.engel@holder.nl":mailto:paul.engel@holder.nl

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
